today many people think about the
pre-raphaelites has been boring
conventional Victorians but the reality
is very different they were anything but
in their time they were rebels they were
groundbreaking and they changed the face
not just for British art but parts of
British society my name is Lucinda
Huxley and I'm going to take you on a
short tour of the tape Britain's new
exhibition the pre-raphaelites Victorian
avant-garde
this is by Dante Gabriel Rossetti it's
got two names it's known as the beloved
and also known as the bride he takes his
inspiration from the Old Testament a
song of songs about a bride preparing
herself for her husband you can see on
the frame here he's got lines from the
Old Testament and he did this regularly
with his art Rossetti was a poet as well
as a painter and he often incorporated
his own poetry he would carve it onto
the frame itself the bride in the center
was modeled by an Irish model called
Marie Ford and Rossetti really prized
her for her red hair something he loved
and you can see that she's wearing this
gorgeous garb where is s he had a kind
of dressing up books in his studio and
he would drape his models in all these
different types of material we know that
the material that goes around her face
around her head was from Peru and
Rossetti was really intrigued by
different textiles from around the world
this painting is notable as being the
only painting by Dante Rosetti to
feature a black figure the child at the
front was initially modelled by a
mixed-race girl and then Rosetti
encountered an American tourist
traveling in London who had with him a
slave boy and Rosetti requested to paint
him
I find this hauntingly beautiful you
cannot help but look at Gabriel's eyes
when you look at this painting his way
below the center of the painting but
your eyes are drawn to him Rossetti had
three siblings all of whom were very
vociferously in favor of the
anti-slavery campaign Rosetti himself
didn't ever lend his voice but I wonder
if this painting is his one attempt at
showing the humiliation and iniquity of
slavery
this is by John Everett Millay it's one
of the earliest pre-raphaelites and one
of the first to be revealed to the
public after they had discovered what
the initials prb or pre-raphaelites it's
called Christ in the carpenter's shop or
Christ in the house of his parents and
what caused controversy was that Millay
dared to show the Holy Family as poor
working-class people this caused huge
controversy it really offended Victorian
sensibilities one of the fiercest
critics of this painting or one of the
most famous was Charles Dickens who
described Jesus as a wryneck blubbering
redheaded boy in a bed gown who he said
looked like he'd been playing in a
gutter
he described the Virgin Mary as hideous
in her ugliness
this watercolor is a very early example
of Dante Rosetti's work this is called
the blue closet and it's interesting
because it's one of those that seldom
seen it shows two women both of whom are
Queens playing musical instruments and
this was a theme that rosette he
returned to again and again for me one
of the most interesting things about
this painting is the figure on the right
here
that's Lizzy Siddal and she was the
pre-raphaelites supermodel in true
supermodel fashion she was discovered
working in a hat shop and propelled via
the paintings that she modeled for to
stardom she was also Dante rosette his
lover for 10 years before he finally
married her
Lizzy Sidel was a surprising supermodel
for Victorian times she didn't fit the
conventions of Victorian beauty she was
tall she was very slender and she had
red hair before the pre-raphaelites
began their obsession with red-haired
women
red hair was literally despised in
Victorian society it was considered not
just unlucky but often a sign of
witchcraft redheads today should be
thankful to Lizzie Sidel for having made
it not only fashionable but a sign of
great beauty
you